A lot of people are calling Gemini File
Search a gamecher that's going to kill
Rag. Well, I spent two days implementing
and testing it in N8N and I uncovered
five key aspects that most people are
overlooking. And some of these could
massively trip you up if you build on
this functionality. So, no point waiting
around. Let's get into it. And to set
the scene, a quick overview of what
Gemini file search actually is.
Essentially, it's a tool that's built
into the Gemini API to ground the AI's
responses in your data, making them more
accurate, relevant, and verifiable. And
that's essentially the purpose of Rag
anyway. And what sparked people's
interest is this idea of a fully managed
RAG system. There are a lot of moving
parts to a Rag application. And Gemini
has abstracted some of these. So from an
ingestion perspective, it'll handle
taking in your file, chunking it into
segments, embedding that into vectors,
and storing those in a vector database.
And then when you ask a question of
Gemini, it can then convert that
question or that query into an
embedding, carry out a semantic search
in the vector store and then generate a
grounded response. So with this Gemini
file search tool, it's able to handle
all of this behind the scenes, making
life a lot easier for you. And there are
some real benefits to this approach. The
main one being that it's a fully managed
pipeline. So you don't need to provision
or manage any vector database
infrastructure like Quadrant or Pine
Cone or Superbase. For the moment, it's
incredibly cheap with no storage costs.
And because this is a fully managed rag
system, it means you can rapidly
prototype rag solutions on top of it,
essentially just by wrapping the main
APIs. And that's something Gemini
demonstrated very well in their press
release where they use the AI Studio app
builder to quickly prototype an app.
Another great aspect of the system is
that it can ingest lots of different
file formats and it's not just scanning
machine readable text. It's carrying out
some level of OCR. So, it's able to read
scanned PDFs and documents, for example.
When it was released earlier in the
week, people were describing it as a new
gamechanging tool that's going to kill
RAG. But not only is this actually just
rag built into the Gemini API, it's not
new. Open AAI have file search built
into the responses API and they had
something similar built into the
assistance API before that. And there's
almost feature parity between OpenAI's
file search and Gemini's file search.
But I think what's actually captured the
imagination of the public is the
pricing. If we look at Gemini file
search, it's free storage. You pay 15
cent per 1 million tokens when you're
embedding the documents or importing
them. And in terms of an inference cost,
it just depends on what model you
choose. And I think this was a really
clever pricing strategy. That idea of
having free storage yet having quite
expensive document embeddings. With
OpenAI, for example, they charge for
storage. Now the first gig is free, but
after that it's $3 per gig per month or
10 cent a day. And then they charge you
$2.50 50 for file search tool calls
which I think is a bit stingy to be
honest. So I spent two days testing out
the Gemini file search API and
integrating it into NADN. And here are
the five key aspects that I realized
people are totally overlooking in this
conversation. And the first one is you
probably still need a data pipeline. As
I mentioned, it was a very clever demo
that Google used when demonstrating this
functionality. The idea that you upload
a document in a web browser and then
chat to the document is all well and
good, but for production rag systems,
you generally need to import thousands
of documents and then also keep those
documents up to date. You can't have
duplicates. And the API doesn't carry
out any uniqueness checks on the
documents you're uploading. So, you need
to build this logic on top of the API.
Here, for example, I uploaded the exact
same document three times into the file
store. And then when I asked questions
of the knowledge base, I was getting
back duplicate chunks. And this was
resulting in poor responses because of
the 10 chunks that came back, most of
them were duplicates of each other. So
Gemini didn't have the data to hand to
generate the response. And this handling
of duplicate records is a critical part
of any rag system. And this is the
reason why you probably still need a
data pipeline. Except you don't need a
data pipeline that's going to take a
document, chunk it, create embeddings,
upsert them to a vector store. You
instead need a data pipeline that's
going to take a file and carry out a
uniqueness check to make sure that that
file hasn't been uploaded before or if
it has and it's changed it needs to be
replaced. Within our rag systems, we
usually handle this with a record
manager. Within NAN here, I have a data
table called my Gemini record manager.
So for every document I upload to the
Google file store, I keep track of that
document here. The document ID, the file
name and importantly a generated hash of
the file which is like a unique
fingerprint of the file and the document
ID. And these things are crucial because
if you upload this file again, it'll
have the same hash and we can skip it.
Or if you upload a new version of this
file, it'll have the same doc ID but a
different hash and you can actually
update it. This is what this type of
pipeline would look like. I've just
uploaded a file to the folder. So, let's
just run it here. We search the files
and folders to get a full list of files
to process. You will be running this
type of pipeline on a schedule. So, this
might be checking every minute for new
files. So, you need to set a lock flag
to make sure that you're not triggering
a new import if an existing import is
already in flight. So, then with all of
the files that are being processed, we
download each file. We generate this
hash which again is that unique
fingerprint. We then search our record
manager and we're looking for documents
that have already been uploaded that
have the same document ID. So it comes
true to this if node. Does it have the
same ID? And in this case it doesn't. So
seeen as the document ID doesn't exist,
we want to carry out another check to
see does the hash exist just to make
sure that there isn't a different file
with identical contents. So with this
search, we're checking to see are there
any records or any documents that have
the same hash value. And in this case,
there isn't. So we can now go to import
this file. If it did, we could simply do
nothing and just archive the file and
move on. So this is a key design pattern
in a production rag system. You need to
avoid duplicate content. That's going to
pollute your vector store and then it'll
rapidly deteriorate the quality of
responses because you're just getting
lots of chunks back that are duplicates
of each other. So back down to here, the
doc doesn't exist in the record manager.
There's no other documents with the same
hash that exists in the record manager.
So from here then we can just reload the
binary of the downloaded file. And this
is a great NAND hack because usually the
binary of a downloaded file is only
available to the node after it. Whereas
with this code node, you can essentially
reload the binary of a previously loaded
file by using this expression. So that
one is definitely worth taking a note
of. So outside of that then we have our
binary and then before uploading to the
Gemini file store we want to extract out
metadata so that we can associate it
with the file in the vector store. This
makes retrieval a lot more accurate
because you can search subsets of the
vectors within the file store. I'll get
back to this in a few minutes because
there are problems here that I want to
discuss. But after that then it's
straight into uploading the file to the
Gemini file store. It's a two-stage
process. Firstly we get an upload link.
So you need to pass in various headers
and then you can also pass in your
custom metadata and any custom chunking
configuration that you want to send in.
And then once you have your upload link
again I'm reloading the binary and then
I'm uploading it to the vector store
based off the upload URL that I was
provided in the previous step. After
that then we can check if it's
processed. We can add the record to our
record manager. And this is crucial
because this is where we save our hash
or document ID and the file ID from the
Gemini file store. And from there we can
archive the file and move on. And just
to demonstrate now if we try to
reprocess that file. So it's disappeared
from here. Let's drop this back into the
folder to be processed. And now let's
re-trigger the ingestion flow. And
you'll see now that the document ID does
exist in our record manager. And as a
result, it's just coming up here to do
nothing and archive the file. So, we've
avoided duplicating the content in the
Gemini file store. And let's do one more
test. So, let's say that there's a new
version of this file. So, let's drop it
back in here. And if we go to file
information, manage versions, and let's
upload a version two of this file. And
this is a great example of where you
only want the latest version of a file
in a knowledge base. Now, I don't
actually have a latest version of this
file, so I dropped in a dummy file, but
we'll click close. And you can see that
has just changed. So now if I come in
here and rerun the ingestion and again
this might run every minute anyway when
the schedule is up and running. And now
you can see the doc does exist. However,
it actually has changed. The hash is
different. So we've removed the old
version and this is deleting the old
document within the Gemini file store.
We're forcing the deletion of all the
chunks. We're deleting the record in our
own data table in N8N. And then we go
back through the process of uploading
the new file. Now, if we come into our
record manager, you can see we now have
an ID26, we're missing a document
headline. That's fine. I'll explain that
in the next section. So, that in a
nutshell is why you still need some
level of a file processing pipeline with
the rag system based on Gemini's file
search. The only difference is it's just
not as complicated. You're not getting
into extracting text from documents,
chunking them, embedding them, upserting
them. Instead, you're just sending the
file to Gemini to be processed. And then
back to the idea of not needing the
infrastructure to run rag, you still
need a database here. Here I'm using
Nadn's data tables. So that's all
coupled in their system. But if you were
running this in code, you would need a
Postgres database. You would need a file
somewhere. You need some way of keeping
track of the documents that are in your
vector store. If you'd like to get
access to our Gemini file search
ingestion and inference flows, then
check out the link in the description to
our community, the AI automators. And I
think it's fair to say that the Gemini
file search is a mid-range rag system.
It's better than naive rag, but
obviously it's missing the advanced rag
techniques that certain use cases
absolutely require to get accurate
results. And secondly, it's a black box.
Everything is hidden away behind the
API. And this is of course by design,
but it just means that if things start
going wrong, if you're not getting the
right grounded answers from Gemini, it
could be hard to figure out what
actually is the problem. In my previous
video on this channel, I talked about
how there's no one-sizefits-all approach
when it comes to rag systems. And this
still holds very true. This Gemini file
search system will be a very good fit
for certain basic or mid-level use
cases. However, once you hit a ceiling
with the responses that you're getting,
there is no way to dive under the hood
and start making changes. At that point,
you'll have to completely replatform
into something you have more control
over. And Gemini File Search is lacking
certain features like hybrid search,
contextual embeddings, re-ranking,
multimodal responses, or context
expansion, which is a topic I've talked
about on this channel. And while it can
ingest spreadsheets and CSV files, it is
at its core a semantic search engine. it
doesn't have the structured retrieval
that certain users questions require.
The third aspect ties into the way it
reads the documents and actually chunks
them. Here, for example, I have a
non-machine readable document. As you
can see, I can't select any text here.
However, when I imported this, all of
the text was OCR successfully, and this
was pretty fast as well. So, the system
does work quite well on the OCR front.
However, you're not getting markdown
headings with the OCR or with the text
extraction. So here I have a heading one
and a heading two. And if you look over
here, it's just text separated by new
lines. So you are losing the document
hierarchy with this system. It just
isn't carrying through the structure.
And I've created multiple videos on the
importance of markdown chunking when it
comes to rag systems. So that's a little
bit of a pity. The other thing I was
surprised by was that there's quite
basic chunking, it seems, in the system.
I have read that they're going to be
using intelligent and dynamic chunking.
But from my experience of importing this
file, this chunk that was returned, for
example, is starting in the middle of
this sentence of the document. Now, this
could be the overlap. So, it's most
likely using recursive character text
splitting. And this may be the start of
the overlap. So, let's say the start is
actually this if the compute resource,
which is here. But at the same time,
it's starting mid-sentence, which is not
ideal. And if you look at where it
finishes, it finishes during the
runbased. It's finishing mids sentence.
So you can see down here during the
runbased. So it's missing on one of the
following which is at the end of that
sentence. So this is pretty crude
chunking as far as I'm concerned and is
likely going to result in issues where
it's actually splitting sentences and
losing critical context in between
chunks. Now, this is a key problem of
rag systems anyway. And this is why I
typically use markdown chunking so that
we can have cleaner, more contained
chunks and we're not missing critical
context. So, that one was a little bit
of a concern, but again, because this is
a black box, because it's an API, they
might upgrade this tomorrow and it might
work fine. So, you just don't know. If
you do have a use case that will benefit
from leveraging the structure of a
document using its headings, then check
out this video on our channel called
Next Level Rag where I demonstrate a
technique called context expansion. My
fourth learning is that metadata
extraction is quite challenging with
Gemini file search and they're missing
one key feature which would be a huge
addition if they added it. So to get
back to my ingestion flow here, I have a
metadata enrichment section. And just to
take a step back, the way I would
normally do this is I would import a
file. I would extract out the text. And
you need lots of ways of extracting out
text because there's different file
formats and different ways of going
about it. But once you have the piece of
text from that file type, I would
normally then send that into an LLM,
either the full file or the first few
pages of a file. And I would extract out
a document summary. I may extract out
things like document dates, categories,
anything that would make sense from a
metadata perspective so that we could
filter the vectors during query time to
be able to get better responses from the
knowledge base. And the issue with the
Gemini file search store is that when we
upload a file, I can show it to you
here. Initially, we get back an upload
URL, which is this one, we then send the
binary and we get back a task ID that we
can check the progress on. But even when
the document has been successfully
processed, as you can see here, we're
not getting the contents of the document
to then further enrich these chunks with
rich metadata. And that's the key
problem. Once you upload the file to the
file search store, there is no way of
retrieving all of the chunks of that
file to be able to recreate or rebuild
it. At least I haven't found a way to do
it yet. So the difficulty with that then
is you essentially need a different way
of processing that file to extract the
text so that you can then use an LLM to
extract out metadata. And that means you
start recreating some of the abstracted
features that Gemini have created in the
first place to make life easier. So this
entire metadata enrichment section is a
bit of a problem really because here I'm
only handling PDF files, but I need to
be able to handle the 100 plus files
that Gemini should be able to handle. So
ideally they would add another endpoint
where you can essentially fetch all
chunks related to a document and that
way you can then reprocess that document
in a different way. And they do have a
metadata enrichment endpoint that you
can use to update the chunks or update
the documents in the file store. The
actual metadata filtering when
triggering Gemini works pretty well
actually. So if we open up the payload
here, we're passing in metadata filter.
I've just hardcoded document sport.
These are Formula 1 documents and I've
set the AI agent to clarify with the
user which sport we're talking about. So
if I ask what are the rules on pit stops
for example, the agent has come back to
me to specify which sport I'm referring
to. So that way we're getting the right
metadata filter to get a better result
set from the Gemini grounding. So we'll
say formula 1 and then the agent passes
in formula 1 as a metadata filter into
the generate content endpoint. So this
is one of the ways that you can use
Gemini file search within N8N is to hook
it up as a tool call for an agent. The
problem with this approach though is
that you have multiple agents. So this
is the main agent. I'm actually using
Gemini here and it's calling another
Gemini agent that has the file store
attached. And this is because Nadn
doesn't currently support Gemini file
search stores. So we get back our answer
which looks good. And if we look at the
response from the tool call, you can see
the text response that we're getting
back. Here you can see the chunks that
have gone in to formulating this
response. Now, these chunks do look very
large. And again, this is the nature of
the black box. I can't exactly dive in
to figure out why that's the case, but
what's nice is you do get these
grounding supports. So, of the response
that was generated, you can see which
chunk indexes refer to which pieces of
text within the response. So, that's a
really nice feature. From an N8
perspective, you're probably well used
to the AI agent node where you can hook
up different tools, different models,
and away you go. And while you can use
the Gemini file search with this node,
it's more as a separate expert or tool
that you actually chat to. So it's more
like a sub agent. Whereas if you
actually want to use the Gemini generate
content API endpoint properly, you're
better off just to hit it directly and
then pass in custom payloads depending
on what you want. And this is what I
mean by you are really tied to the
Google infrastructure and the Gemini
ecosystem. The Gemini API has huge
capabilities around text processing,
image, video, documents, file search,
now tool calling. So it is ideal if
developers are looking to leverage a lot
of this tech. And in a way, it's
actually competing against NADN's own AI
agent node and functionality around tool
calling and memory and model usage. So
you definitely can use the two systems
together. You just need to choose a
design approach when it comes to
actually building out the chat flows.
Here I just tie directly into the API.
Here I'm using an AI agent that has a
tool call into the Gemini API. And
there's one other option and it brought
out a dedicated Gemini node. Now this
doesn't yet support file search stores,
but it's possible they'll bring out a
new version soon where you can actually
just pass in the file search store name
into this node and then you can hook up
different tools and away you go. lots of
different ways that you can actually
approach it. So that's the metadata
filtering and extraction and the
challenges around that. So I think an
additional API endpoint to fetch all
chunks of a document would be really
really welcome. And finally, the last
thing is with this approach of using
Gemini file search or with the likes of
using OpenAI's file search, you're
totally wedded into those ecosystems.
All of your data will be stored with
those companies. So you definitely have
to satisfy yourself with the privacy
policies, the data retention policies,
data security policies and then you also
need to think about things like
personally identifiable information,
GDPR because with these types of hosted
solutions, your corporate data is
essentially sitting on someone else's
property. So that is the price you pay
for the convenience of this type of
service. And the other thing is vendor
lockin. You can't exactly use Gemini
File Search and OpenAI's Inference or
LLMs. With Gemini File Search, you have
to use 2.5 Pro or 2.5 Flash. And again,
that'll be fine for some use cases, but
for others, you will want to have the
option and flexibility. So, onto the
verdict. Where does this fit in the Rag
landscape today? Well, number one, it
isn't new. Rag as a service has existed.
There's plenty of companies that do it
as well as the likes of the main
providers like OpenAI, AWS Bedrock,
Azure. So, Rag as a service isn't new.
The key thing here, as I mentioned, is
the pricing. But even outside of that,
the idea of a fully managed Rag pipeline
where you can simply just send in
documents and then just chat to them is
pretty compelling for a lot of users.
And if your company allows for it, it's
definitely not a bad first step into the
world of RAG. That being said, you
definitely lose the flexibility of
configuring the infrastructure behind
the scenes and once you hit that ceiling
with the technology, you definitely will
need to replplatform onto something
else. But by and large, this will be a
great solution for a lot of companies.
If you'd like to get access to our
Gemini file search ingestion and
inference flows for N8N, then check out
the link in the description to our
community, the AI Automators, where you
can join hundreds of fellow builders,
all leveraging the latest in AI and Rag
to further their businesses. I've spent
hundreds of hours learning rag and
aentic design patterns, and I've
distilled all of that down into nine
different rag designs. Check out my
master class here for a full deep dive.